The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Spark, by Edith Wharton and E. C. Caswell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Spark
       (The 'Sixties)

Author: Edith Wharton

Illustrator: E. C. Caswell

Release Date: February 2, 2020 [EBook #61298]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPARK ***




Produced by Chuck Greif, MWS and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                             OLD NEW YORK

                               THE SPARK

                           (_The ’Sixties_)




                           By EDITH WHARTON


                           OLD NEW YORK

                              FALSE DAWN
                              THE OLD MAID
                              THE SPARK
                              NEW YEAR’S DAY

                           THE GLIMPSES OF THE MOON

                           THE AGE OF INNOCENCE

                           SUMMER

                           THE REEF

                           THE MARNE

                           FRENCH WAYS AND THEIR MEANING




                             OLD NEW YORK

                               THE SPARK

                           (_The ’Sixties_)

                                  BY

                             EDITH WHARTON

                AUTHOR OF “THE AGE OF INNOCENCE,” ETC.

                     DECORATIONS BY E. C. CASWELL

                       [Illustration: colophon]

                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

                     NEW YORK :: LONDON :: MCMXXIV

                          COPYRIGHT, 1924, BY

                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

          _Copyright, 1924, by The Curtis Publishing Company_

                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




                               THE SPARK

                           (_The ’Sixties_)




                               THE SPARK

                           (_The ’Sixties_)




I


“You idiot!” said his wife, and threw down her cards.

I turned my head away quickly, to avoid seeing Hayley Delane’s face;
though why I wished to avoid it I could not have told you, much less why
I should have imagined (if I did) that a man of his age and importance
would notice what was happening to the wholly negligible features of a
youth like myself.

I turned away so that he should not see how it hurt me to hear him
called an idiot, even in joke--well, at least half in joke; yet I often
thought him an idiot myself, and bad as my own poker was, I knew enough
of the game to judge that his--when he wasn’t attending--fully justified
such an outburst from his wife. Why her sally disturbed me I couldn’t
have said; nor why, when it was greeted by a shrill guffaw from her
“latest,” young Bolton Byrne, I itched to cuff the little bounder; nor
why, when Hayley Delane, on whom banter always dawned slowly but
certainly, at length gave forth his low rich gurgle of appreciation--why
then, most of all, I wanted to blot the whole scene from my memory. Why?

There they sat, as I had so often seen them, in Jack Alstrop’s luxurious
bookless library (I’m sure the rich rows behind the glass doors were
hollow), while beyond the windows the pale twilight thickened to blue
over Long Island lawns and woods and a moonlit streak of sea. No one
ever looked out at _that_, except to conjecture what sort of weather
there would be the next day for polo, or hunting, or racing, or whatever
use the season required the face of nature to be put to; no one was
aware of the twilight, the moon or the blue shadows--and Hayley Delane
least of all. Day after day, night after night, he sat anchored at
somebody’s poker-table, and fumbled absently with his cards....

Yes; that was the man. He didn’t even (as it was once said of a great
authority on heraldry) know his own silly business; which was to hang
about in his wife’s train, play poker with her friends, and giggle at
her nonsense and theirs. No wonder Mrs. Delane was sometimes
exasperated. As she said, _she_ hadn’t asked him to marry her! Rather
not: all their contemporaries could remember what a thunderbolt it had
been on his side. The first time he had seen her--at the theater, I
think: “Who’s that? Over there--with the heaps of hair?”--“Oh, Leila
Gracy? Why, she’s not _really_ pretty....” “Well, I’m going to marry
her--” “Marry her? But her father’s that old scoundrel Bill Gracy ...
the one....” “I’m going to marry her....” “The one who’s had to resign
from all his clubs....” “I’m going to marry her....” And he did; and it
was she, if you please, who kept him dangling, and who would and who
wouldn’t, until some whipper-snapper of a youth, who was meanwhile
making up his mind about _her_, had finally decided in the negative.

Such had been Hayley Delane’s marriage; and such, I imagined, his way of
conducting most of the transactions of his futile clumsy life.... Big
bursts of impulse--storms he couldn’t control--then long periods of
drowsing calm, during which, something made me feel, old regrets and
remorses woke and stirred under the indolent surface of his nature. And
yet, wasn’t I simply romanticizing a commonplace case? I turned back
from the window to look at the group. The bringing of candles to the
card-tables had scattered pools of illumination throughout the shadowy
room; in their radiance Delane’s harsh head stood out like a cliff from
a flowery plain. Perhaps it was only his bigness, his heaviness and
swarthiness--perhaps his greater age, for he must have been at least
fifteen years older than his wife and most of her friends; at any rate,
I could never look at him without feeling that he belonged elsewhere,
not so much in another society as in another age. For there was no doubt
that the society he lived in suited him well enough. He shared
cheerfully in all the amusements of his little set--rode, played polo,
hunted and drove his four-in-hand with the best of them (you will see,
by the last allusion, that we were still in the archaic ’nineties). Nor
could I guess what other occupations he would have preferred, had he
been given his choice. In spite of my admiration for him I could not
bring myself to think it was Leila Gracy who had subdued him to what she
worked in. What would he have chosen to do if he had not met her that
night at the play? Why, I rather thought, to meet and marry somebody
else just like her. No; the difference in him was not in his tastes--it
was in something ever so much deeper. Yet what is deeper in a man than
his tastes?

In another age, then, he would probably have been doing the equivalent
of what he was doing now: idling, taking much violent exercise, eating
more than was good for him, laughing at the same kind of nonsense, and
worshipping, with the same kind of dull routine-worship, the same kind
of woman, whether dressed in a crinoline, a farthingale, a peplum or the
skins of beasts--it didn’t much matter under what sumptuary dispensation
one placed her. Only in that other age there might have been outlets for
other faculties, now dormant, perhaps even atrophied, but which
must--yes, really must--have had something to do with the building of
that big friendly forehead, the monumental nose, and the rich dimple
which now and then furrowed his cheek with light. Did the dimple even
mean no more than Leila Gracy?

Well, perhaps it was _I_ who was the idiot, if she’d only known it; an
idiot to believe in her husband, be obsessed by him, oppressed by him,
when, for thirty years now, he’d been only the Hayley Delane whom
everybody took for granted, and was glad to see, and immediately forgot.
Turning from my contemplation of that great structural head, I looked at
his wife. Her head was still like something in the making, something
just flowering, a girl’s head ringed with haze. Even the kindly candles
betrayed the lines in her face, the paint on her lips, the peroxide on
her hair; but they could not lessen her fluidity of outline, or the
girlishness that lurked in her eyes, floating up from their depths like
a startled Naïad. There was an irreducible innocence about her, as there
so often is about women who have spent their time in amassing
sentimental experiences. As I looked at the husband and wife, thus
confronted above the cards, I marvelled more and more that it was she
who ruled and he who bent the neck. You will see by this how young I
still was.

So young, indeed, that Hayley Delane had dawned on me in my school-days
as an accomplished fact, a finished monument: like Trinity Church, the
Reservoir or the Knickerbocker Club. A New Yorker of my generation could
no more imagine him altered or away than any of those venerable
institutions. And so I had continued to take him for granted till, my
Harvard days over, I had come back after an interval of world-wandering
to settle down in New York, and he had broken on me afresh as something
still not wholly accounted for, and more interesting than I had
suspected.

I don’t say the matter kept me awake. I had my own business (in a
down-town office), and the pleasures of my age; I was hard at work
discovering New York. But now and then the Hayley Delane riddle would
thrust itself between me and my other interests, as it had done tonight
just because his wife had sneered at him, and he had laughed and thought
her funny. And at such times I found myself moved and excited out of all
proportion to anything I knew about him, or had observed in him, to
justify such emotions.

The game was over, the dressing-bell had rung. It rang again presently,
with a discreet insistence: Alstrop, easy in all else, preferred that
his guests should not be more than half an hour late for dinner.

“I say--_Leila!_” he finally remonstrated.

The golden coils drooped above her chips. “Yes--yes. Just a minute.
Hayley, you’ll have to pay for me.--There, I’m going!” She laughed and
pushed back her chair.

Delane, laughing also, got up lazily. Byrne flew to open the door for
Mrs. Delane; the other women trooped out with her. Delane, having
settled her debts, picked up her gold-mesh bag and cigarette-case, and
followed.

I turned toward a window opening on the lawn. There was just time to
stretch my legs while curling-tongs and powder were being plied above
stairs. Alstrop joined me, and we stood staring up at a soft dishevelled
sky in which the first stars came and went.

“Curse it--looks rotten for our match tomorrow!”

“Yes--but what a good smell the coming rain does give to things!”

He laughed. “You’re an optimist--like old Hayley.”

We strolled across the lawn toward the woodland.

“Why like old Hayley?”

“Oh, he’s a regular philosopher. I’ve never seen him put out, have you?”

“No. That must be what makes him look so sad,” I exclaimed.

“Sad? Hayley? Why, I was just saying--”

“Yes, I know. But the only people who are never put out are the people
who don’t care; and not caring is about the saddest occupation there is.
I’d like to see him in a rage just once.”

My host gave a faint whistle, and remarked: “By Jove, I believe the
wind’s hauling round to the north. If it does--” He moistened his finger
and held it up.

I knew there was no use in theorizing with Alstrop; but I tried another
tack. “What on earth has Delane done with himself all these years?” I
asked. Alstrop was forty, or thereabouts, and by a good many years
better able than I to cast a backward glance over the problem.

But the effort seemed beyond him. “Why--what years?”

“Well--ever since he left college.”

“Lord! How do I know? I wasn’t there. Hayley must be well past fifty.”

It sounded formidable to my youth; almost like a geological era. And
that suited him, in a way--I could imagine him drifting, or silting, or
something measurable by aeons, at the rate of about a millimetre a
century.

“How long has he been married?” I asked.

“I don’t know that either; nearly twenty years, I should say. The kids
are growing up. The boys are both at Groton. Leila doesn’t look it, I
must say--not in some lights.”

“Well, then, what’s he been doing since he married?”

“Why, what should he have done? He’s always had money enough to do what
he likes. He’s got his partnership in the bank, of course. They say that
rascally old father-in-law, whom he refuses to see, gets a good deal of
money out of him. You know he’s awfully soft-hearted. But he can swing
it all, I fancy. Then he sits on lots of boards--Blind Asylum,
Children’s Aid, S.P.C.A., and all the rest. And there isn’t a better
sport going.”

“But that’s not what I mean,” I persisted.

Alstrop looked at me through the darkness. “You don’t mean women? I
never heard--but then one wouldn’t, very likely. He’s a shut-up
fellow.”

We turned back to dress for dinner. Yes, that was the word I wanted; he
was a shut-up fellow. Even the rudimentary Alstrop felt it. But shut-up
consciously, deliberately--or only instinctively, congenitally? There
the mystery lay.




II


The big polo match came off the next day. It was the first of the
season, and, taking respectful note of the fact, the barometer, after a
night of showers, jumped back to Fair.

All Fifth Avenue had poured down to see New York versus Hempstead. The
beautifully rolled lawns and freshly painted club stand were sprinkled
with spring dresses and abloom with sunshades, and coaches and other
vehicles without number enclosed the farther side of the field.

Hayley Delane still played polo, though he had grown so heavy that the
cost of providing himself with mounts must have been considerable. He
was, of course, no longer regarded as in the first rank; indeed, in
these later days, when the game has become an exact science, I hardly
know to what use such a weighty body as his could be put. But in that
far-off dawn of the sport his sureness and swiftness of stroke caused
him to be still regarded as a useful back, besides being esteemed for
the part he had taken in introducing and establishing the game.

I remember little of the beginning of the game, which resembled many
others I had seen. I never played myself, and I had no money on: for me
the principal interest of the scene lay in the May weather, the ripple
of spring dresses over the turf, the sense of youth, fun, gaiety, of
young manhood and womanhood weaving their eternal pattern under the
conniving sky. Now and then they were interrupted for a moment by a
quick “Oh” which turned all those tangled glances the same way, as two
glittering streaks of men and horses dashed across the green, locked,
swayed, rayed outward into starry figures, and rolled back. But it was
for a moment only--then eyes wandered again, chatter began, and youth
and sex had it their own way till the next charge shook them from their
trance.

I was of the number of these divided watchers. Polo as a spectacle did
not amuse me for long, and I saw about as little of it as the pretty
girls perched beside their swains on coach-tops and club stand. But by
chance my vague wanderings brought me to the white palings enclosing the
field, and there, in a cluster of spectators, I caught sight of Leila
Delane.

As I approached I was surprised to notice a familiar figure shouldering
away from her. One still saw old Bill Gracy often enough in the outer
purlieus of the big race-courses; but I wondered how he had got into the
enclosure of a fashionable Polo Club. There he was, though,
unmistakably; who could forget that swelling chest under the
shabby-smart racing-coat, the gray top-hat always pushed back from his
thin auburn curls, and the mixture of furtiveness and swagger which made
his liquid glance so pitiful? Among the figures that rose here and there
like warning ruins from the dead-level of old New York’s respectability,
none was more typical than Bill Gracy’s; my gaze followed him curiously
as he shuffled away from his daughter. “Trying to get more money out of
her,” I concluded; and remembered what Alstrop had said of Delane’s
generosity.

“Well, if I were Delane,” I thought, “I’d pay a good deal to keep that
old ruffian out of sight.”

Mrs. Delane, turning to watch her father’s retreat, saw me and nodded.
At the same moment Delane, on a tall deep-chested poney, ambled across
the field, stick on shoulder. As he rode thus, heavily yet mightily, in
his red-and-black shirt and white breeches, his head standing out like a
bronze against the turf, I whimsically recalled the figure of
Guidoriccio da Foligno, the famous mercenary, riding at a slow powerful
pace across the fortressed fresco of the Town Hall of Siena. Why a New
York banker of excessive weight and more than middle age, jogging on a
poney across a Long Island polo field, should have reminded me of a
martial figure on an armoured war-horse, I find it hard to explain. As
far as I knew there were no turreted fortresses in Delane’s background;
and his too juvenile polo cap and gaudy shirt were a poor substitute for
Guidoriccio’s coat of mail. But it was the kind of trick the man was
always playing; reminding me, in his lazy torpid way, of times and
scenes and people greater than he could know. That was why he kept on
interesting me.

It was this interest which caused me to pause by Mrs. Delane, whom I
generally avoided. After a vague smile she had already turned her gaze
on the field.

“You’re admiring your husband?” I suggested, as Delane’s trot carried
him across our line of vision.

She glanced at me dubiously. “You think he’s too fat to play, I
suppose?” she retorted, a little snappishly.

“I think he’s the finest figure in sight. He looks like a great general,
a great soldier of fortune--in an old fresco, I mean.”

She stared, perhaps suspecting irony, as she always did beneath the
unintelligible.

“Ah, _he_ can pay anything he likes for his mounts!” she murmured; and
added, with a wandering laugh: “Do you mean it as a compliment? Shall I
tell him what you say?”

“I wish you would.”

But her eyes were off again, this time to the opposite end of the field.
Of course--Bolton Byrne was playing on the other side! The fool of a
woman was always like that--absorbed in her latest adventure. Yet there
had been so many, and she must by this time have been so radiantly sure
there would be more! But at every one the girl was born anew in her:
she blushed, palpitated, “sat out” dances, plotted for tête-à-têtes,
pressed flowers (I’ll wager) in her copy of “Omar Khayyám,” and was all
white muslin and wild roses while it lasted. And the Byrne fever was
then at its height.

It did not seem polite to leave her immediately, and I continued to
watch the field at her side. “It’s their last chance to score,” she
flung at me, leaving me to apply the ambiguous pronoun; and after that
we remained silent.

The game had been a close one; the two sides were five each, and the
crowd about the rails hung breathless on the last minutes. The struggle
was short and swift, and dramatic enough to hold even the philanderers
on the coach-tops. Once I stole a glance at Mrs. Delane, and saw the
colour rush to her cheek. Byrne was hurling himself across the field,
crouched on the neck of his somewhat weedy mount, his stick swung like a
lance--a pretty enough sight, for he was young and supple, and light in
the saddle.

“They’re going to win!” she gasped with a happy cry.

But just then Byrne’s poney, unequal to the pace, stumbled, faltered,
and came down. His rider dropped from the saddle, hauled the animal to
his feet, and stood for a minute half-dazed before he scrambled up
again. That minute made the difference. It gave the other side their
chance. The knot of men and horses tightened, wavered, grew loose, broke
up in arrowing flights; and suddenly a ball--Delane’s--sped through the
enemy’s goal, victorious. A roar of delight went up; “Good for old
Hayley!” voices shouted. Mrs. Delane gave a little sour laugh.
“That--that beastly poney; I warned him it was no good--and the ground
still so slippery,” she broke out.

“The poney? Why, he’s a ripper. It’s not every mount that will carry
Delane’s weight,” I said. She stared at me unseeingly and turned away
with twitching lips. I saw her speeding off toward the enclosure.

I followed hastily, wanting to see Delane in the moment of his triumph.
I knew he took all these little sporting successes with an absurd
seriousness, as if, mysteriously, they were the shadow of more
substantial achievements, dreamed of, or accomplished, in some previous
life. And perhaps the elderly man’s vanity in holding his own with the
youngsters was also an element of his satisfaction; how could one tell,
in a mind of such monumental simplicity?

When I reached the saddling enclosure I did not at once discover him; an
unpleasant sight met my eyes instead. Bolton Byrne, livid and
withered--his face like an old woman’s, I thought--rode across the empty
field, angrily lashing his poney’s flanks. He slipped to the ground, and
as he did so, struck the shivering animal a last blow clean across the
head. An unpleasant sight--

But retribution fell. It came like a black-and-red thunderbolt
descending on the wretch out of the heaven. Delane had him by the
collar, had struck him with his whip across the shoulders, and then
flung him off like a thing too mean for human handling. It was over in
the taking of a breath--then, while the crowd hummed and closed in,
leaving Byrne to slink away as if he had become invisible, I saw my big
Delane, grown calm and apathetic, turn to the poney and lay a soothing
hand on its neck.

I was pushing forward, moved by the impulse to press that hand, when his
wife went up to him. Though I was not far off I could not hear what she
said; people did not speak loud in those days, or “make scenes,” and the
two or three words which issued from Mrs. Delane’s lips must have been
inaudible to everyone but her husband. On his dark face they raised a
sudden redness; he made a motion of his free arm (the other hand still
on the poney’s neck), as if to wave aside an importunate child; then he
felt in his pocket, drew out a cigarette, and lit it. Mrs. Delane, white
as a ghost, was hurrying back to Alstrop’s coach.

I was turning away too when I saw her husband hailed again. This time it
was Bill Gracy, shoving and yet effacing himself, as his manner was,
who came up, a facile tear on his lashes, his smile half tremulous, half
defiant, a yellow-gloved hand held out.

“God bless you for it, Hayley--God bless you, my dear boy!”

Delane’s hand reluctantly left the poney’s neck. It wavered for an
instant, just touched the other’s palm, and was instantly engulfed in
it. Then Delane, without speaking, turned toward the shed where his
mounts were being rubbed down, while his father-in-law swaggered from
the scene.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had promised, on the way home, to stop for tea at a friend’s house
half-way between the Polo Club and Alstrop’s. Another friend, who was
also going there, offered me a lift, and carried me on to Alstrop’s
afterward.

During our drive, and about the tea-table, the talk of course dwelt
mainly on the awkward incident of Bolton Byrne’s thrashing. The women
were horrified or admiring, as their humour moved them; but the men all
agreed that it was natural enough. In such a case any pretext was
permissible, they said; though it was stupid of Hayley to air his
grievance on a public occasion. But then he _was_ stupid--that was the
consensus of opinion. If there was a blundering way of doing a thing
that needed to be done, trust him to hit on it! For the rest, everyone
spoke of him affectionately, and agreed that Leila was a fool ... and
nobody particularly liked Byrne, an “outsider” who had pushed himself
into society by means of cheek and showy horsemanship. But Leila, it was
agreed, had always had a weakness for “outsiders,” perhaps because
their admiration flattered her extreme desire to be thought “in.”

“Wonder how many of the party you’ll find left--this affair must have
caused a good deal of a shake-up,” my friend said, as I got down at
Alstrop’s door; and the same thought was in my own mind. Byrne would be
gone, of course; and no doubt, in another direction, Delane and Leila. I
wished I had a chance to shake that blundering hand of Hayley’s....

Hall and drawing-room were empty; the dressing-bell must have sounded
its discreet appeal more than once, and I was relieved to find it had
been heeded. I didn’t want to stumble on any of my fellow-guests till I
had seen our host. As I was dashing upstairs I heard him call me from
the library, and turned back.

“No hurry--dinner put off till nine,” he said cheerfully; and added, on
a note of inexpressible relief: “We’ve had a tough job of it--_ouf_!”

The room looked as if they had: the card tables stood untouched, and the
deep armchairs, gathered into confidential groups, seemed still
deliberating on the knotty problem. I noticed that a good deal of
whiskey and soda had gone toward its solution.

“What happened? Has Byrne left?”

“Byrne? No--thank goodness!” Alstrop looked at me almost reproachfully.
“Why should he? That was just what we wanted to avoid.”

“I don’t understand. You don’t mean that _he’s_ stayed and the Delanes
have gone?”

“Lord forbid! Why should they, either? Hayley’s apologized!”

My jaw fell, and I returned my host’s stare.

“Apologized? To that hound? For what?”

Alstrop gave an impatient shrug. “Oh, for God’s sake don’t reopen the
cursèd question,” it seemed to say. Aloud he echoed: “For what? Why,
after all, a man’s got a right to thrash his own poney, hasn’t he? It
was beastly unsportsmanlike, of course--but it’s nobody’s business if
Byrne chooses to be that kind of a cad. That’s what Hayley saw--when he
cooled down.”

“Then I’m sorry he cooled down.”

Alstrop looked distinctly annoyed. “I don’t follow you. We had a hard
enough job. You said you wanted to see him in a rage just once; but you
don’t want him to go on making an ass of himself, do you?”

“I don’t call it making an ass of himself to thrash Byrne.”

“And to advertise his conjugal difficulties all over Long Island, with
twenty newspaper reporters at his heels?”

I stood silent, baffled but incredulous. “I don’t believe he ever gave
that a thought. I wonder who put it to him first in that way?”

Alstrop twisted his unlit cigarette about in his fingers. “We all
did--as delicately as we could. But it was Leila who finally convinced
him. I must say Leila was very game.”

I still pondered: the scene in the paddock rose again before me, the
quivering agonized animal, and the way Delane’s big hand had been laid
reassuringly on its neck.

“Nonsense! I don’t believe a word of it!” I declared.

“A word of what I’ve been telling you?”

“Well, of the official version of the case.”

To my surprise, Alstrop met my glance with an eye neither puzzled nor
resentful. A shadow seemed to be lifted from his honest face.

“What _do_ you believe?” he asked.

“Why, that Delane thrashed that cur for ill-treating the poney, and not
in the least for being too attentive to Mrs. Delane. I was there, I tell
you--I saw him.”

Alstrop’s brow cleared completely. “There’s something to be said for
that theory,” he agreed, smiling over the match he was holding to his
cigarette.

“Well, then--what was there to apologize for?”

“Why, for _that_--butting in between Byrne and his horse. Don’t you see,
you young idiot? If Hayley hadn’t apologized, the mud was bound to
stick to his wife. Everybody would have said the row was on her account.
It’s as plain as the knob on the door--there wasn’t anything else for
him to do. He saw it well enough after she’d said a dozen words to
him--”

“I wonder what those words were,” I muttered.

“Don’t know. He and she came downstairs together. He looked a hundred
years old, poor old chap. ‘It’s the cruelty, it’s the cruelty,’ he kept
saying; ‘I hate cruelty.’ I rather think he knows we’re all on his side.
Anyhow, it’s all patched up and well patched up; and I’ve ordered my
last ’eighty-four Georges Goulet brought up for dinner. Meant to keep it
for my own wedding-breakfast; but since this afternoon I’ve rather lost
interest in that festivity,” Alstrop concluded with a celibate grin.

“Well,” I repeated, as though it were a relief to say, “I could swear he
did it for the poney.”

“Oh, so could I,” my host acquiesced as we went upstairs together.

On my threshold, he took me by the arm and followed me in. I saw there
was still something on his mind.

“Look here, old chap--you say you were in there when it happened?”

“Yes. Close by--”

“Well,” he interrupted, “for the Lord’s sake don’t allude to the subject
tonight, will you?”

“Of course not.”

“Thanks a lot. Truth is, it was a narrow squeak, and I couldn’t help
admiring the way Leila played up. She was in a fury with Hayley; but she
got herself in hand in no time, and behaved very decently. She told me
privately he was often like that--flaring out all of a sudden like a
madman. You wouldn’t imagine it, would you, with that quiet way of his?
She says she thinks it’s his old wound.”

“What old wound?”

“Didn’t you know he was wounded--where was it? Bull Run, I believe. In
the head--”

No, I hadn’t known; hadn’t even heard, or remembered, that Delane had
been in the Civil War. I stood and stared in my astonishment.

“Hayley Delane? In the war?”

“Why, of course. All through it.”

“But Bull Run--Bull Run was at the very beginning.” I broke off to go
through a rapid mental calculation. “Look here, Jack, it can’t be; he’s
not over fifty-five. You told me so yourself. If he was in it from the
beginning he must have gone into it as a schoolboy.”

“Well, that’s just what he did: ran away from school to volunteer. His
family didn’t know what had become of him till he was wounded. I
remember hearing my people talk about it. Great old sport, Hayley. I’d
have given a lot not to have this thing happen; not at my place anyhow;
but it _has_, and there’s no help for it. Look here, you swear you won’t
make a sign, will you? I’ve got all the others into line, and if you’ll
back us up we’ll have a regular Happy Family Evening. Jump into your
clothes--it’s nearly nine.”




III


This is not a story-teller’s story; it is not even the kind of episode
capable of being shaped into one. Had it been, I should have reached my
climax, or at any rate its first stage, in the incident at the Polo
Club, and what I have left to tell would be the effect of that incident
on the lives of the three persons concerned.

It is not a story, or anything in the semblance of a story, but merely
an attempt to depict for you--and in so doing, perhaps make clearer to
myself--the aspect and character of a man whom I loved, perplexedly but
faithfully, for many years. I make no apology, therefore, for the fact
that Bolton Byrne, whose evil shadow ought to fall across all my
remaining pages, never again appears in them; and that the last I saw of
him (for my purpose) was when, after our exaggeratedly cheerful and even
noisy dinner that evening at Jack Alstrop’s, I observed him shaking
hands with Hayley Delane, and declaring, with pinched lips and a tone of
falsetto cordiality: “Bear malice? Well, rather not--why, what rot!
All’s fair in--in polo, ain’t it? I should say so! Yes--off first thing
tomorrow. S’pose of course you’re staying on with Jack over Sunday? I
wish I hadn’t promised the Gildermeres--.” And therewith he vanishes,
having served his purpose as a passing lantern-flash across the twilight
of Hayley Delane’s character.

All the while, I continued to feel that it was not Bolton Byrne who
mattered. While clubs and drawing-rooms twittered with the episode, and
friends grew portentous in trying to look unconscious, and said “I don’t
know what you mean,” with eyes beseeching you to speak if you knew more
than they did, I had already discarded the whole affair, as I was sure
Delane had. “It _was_ the poney, and nothing but the poney,” I chuckled
to myself, as pleased as if I had owed Mrs. Delane a grudge, and were
exulting in her abasement; and still there ran through my mind the
phrase which Alstrop said Delane had kept repeating: “It was the
cruelty--it was the cruelty. I hate cruelty.”

How it fitted in, now, with the other fact my host had let drop--the
fact that Delane had fought all through the civil war! It seemed
incredible that it should have come to me as a surprise; that I should
have forgotten, or perhaps never even known, this phase of his history.
Yet in young men like myself, just out of college in the ’nineties, such
ignorance was more excusable than now seems possible.

That was the dark time of our national indifference, before the
country’s awakening; no doubt the war seemed much farther from us, much
less a part of us, than it does to the young men of today. Such was the
case, at any rate, in old New York, and more particularly, perhaps, in
the little clan of well-to-do and indolent old New Yorkers among whom I
had grown up. Some of these, indeed, had fought bravely through the four
years: New York had borne her part, a memorable part, in the long
struggle. But I remember with what perplexity I first wakened to the
fact--it was in my school-days--that if certain of my father’s kinsmen
and contemporaries had been in the war, others--how many!--had stood
aside. I recall especially the shock with which, at school, I had heard
a boy explain his father’s lameness: “He’s never got over that shot in
the leg he got at Chancellorsville.”

I stared; for my friend’s father was just my own father’s age. At the
moment (it was at a school foot-ball match) the two men were standing
side by side, in full sight of us--_his_ father stooping, halt and old,
mine, even to filial eyes, straight and youthful. Only an hour before I
had been bragging to my friend about the wonderful shot my father was
(he had taken me down to his North Carolina shooting at Christmas); but
now I stood abashed.

The next time I went home for the holidays I said to my mother, one day
when we were alone: “Mother, why didn’t father fight in the war?” My
heart was beating so hard that I thought she must have seen my
excitement and been shocked. But she raised an untroubled face from her
embroidery.

“Your father, dear? Why, because he was a married man.” She had a
reminiscent smile. “Molly was born already--she was six months old when
Fort Sumter fell. I remember I was nursing her when Papa came in with
the news. We couldn’t believe it.” She paused to match a silk placidly.
“Married men weren’t called upon to fight,” she explained.

“But they _did_, though, Mother! Payson Gray’s father fought. He was so
badly wounded at Chancellorsville that he’s had to walk with a stick
ever since.”

“Well, my dear, I don’t suppose you would want your Papa to be like
that, would you?” She paused again, and finding I made no answer,
probably thought it pained me to be thus convicted of heartlessness, for
she added, as if softening the rebuke: “Two of your father’s cousins
_did_ fight: his cousins Harold and James. They were young men, with no
family obligations. And poor Jamie was killed, you remember.”

I listened in silence, and never again spoke to my mother of the war.
Nor indeed to anyone--even myself. I buried the whole business out of
sight, out of hearing, as I thought. After all, the war had all happened
long ago; it had been over ten years when I was born. And nobody ever
talked about it nowadays. Still, one did, of course, as one grew up,
meet older men of whom it was said: “Yes, so-and-so was in the war.”
Many of them even continued to be known by the military titles with
which they had left the service: Colonel Ruscott, Major Detrancy, old
General Scole. People smiled a little, but admitted that, if it pleased
them to keep their army rank, it was a right they had earned. Hayley
Delane, it appeared, thought differently. He had never allowed himself
to be called “Major” or “Colonel” (I think he had left the service a
Colonel). And besides he was years younger than these veterans. To find
that he had fought at their side was like discovering that the
grandmother one could remember playing with had been lifted up by her
nurse to see General Washington. I always thought of Hayley Delane as
belonging to my own generation rather than to my father’s; though I knew
him to be so much older than myself, and occasionally called him “sir,”
I felt on an equality with him, the equality produced by sharing the
same amusements and talking of them in the same slang. And indeed he
must have been ten or fifteen years younger than the few men I knew who
had been in the war, none of whom, I was sure, had had to run away from
school to volunteer; so that my forgetfulness (or perhaps even
ignorance) of his past was not inexcusable.

Broad and Delane had been, for two or three generations, one of the safe
and conservative private banks of New York. My friend Hayley had been
made a partner early in his career; the post was almost hereditary in
his family. It happened that, not long after the scene at Alstrop’s, I
was offered a position in the house. The offer came, not through Delane,
but through Mr. Frederick Broad, the senior member, who was an old
friend of my father’s. The chance was too advantageous to be rejected,
and I transferred to a desk at Broad and Delane’s my middling
capacities and my earnest desire to do my best. It was owing to this
accidental change that there gradually grew up between Hayley Delane and
myself a sentiment almost filial on my part, elder-brotherly on his--for
paternal one could hardly call him, even with his children.

My job need not have thrown me in his way, for his business duties sat
lightly on him, and his hours at the bank were neither long nor regular.
But he appeared to take a liking to me, and soon began to call on me for
the many small services which, in the world of affairs, a young man can
render his elders. His great perplexity was the writing of business
letters. He knew what he wanted to say; his sense of the proper use of
words was clear and prompt; I never knew anyone more impatient of the
hazy verbiage with which American primary culture was already
corrupting our speech. He would put his finger at once on these
laborious inaccuracies, growling: “For God’s sake, translate it into
English--” but when he had to write, or worse still dictate, a letter
his friendly forehead and big hands grew damp, and he would mutter, half
to himself and half to me: “How the devil shall I say: ‘Your letter of
the blankth came yesterday, and after thinking over what you propose I
don’t like the looks of it’?”--“Why, say just that,” I would answer; but
he would shake his head and object: “My dear fellow, you’re as bad as I
am. You don’t know how _to write good English_.” In his mind there was a
gulf fixed between speaking and writing the language. I could never get
his imagination to bridge this gulf, or to see that the phrases which
fell from his lips were “better English” than the written version,
produced after much toil and pen-biting, which consisted in translating
the same statement into some such language as: “I am in receipt of your
communication of the 30th ultimo, and regret to be compelled to inform
you in reply that, after mature consideration of the proposals therein
contained, I find myself unable to pronounce a favourable judgment upon
the same”--usually sending a furious dash through “the same” as
“counterjumper’s lingo,” and then groaning over his inability to find a
more Johnsonian substitute.

“The trouble with me,” he used to say, “is that both my parents were
martinets on grammar, and never let any of us children use a vulgar
expression without correcting us.” (By “vulgar” he meant either familiar
or inexact.) “We were brought up on the best books--Scott and
Washington Irving, old what’s-his-name who wrote the _Spectator_, and
Gibbon and so forth; and though I’m not a literary man, and never set up
to be, I can’t forget my early training, and when I see the children
reading a newspaper-fellow like Kipling I want to tear the rubbish out
of their hands. Cheap journalism--that’s what most modern books are. And
you’ll excuse my saying, dear boy, that even you are too young to know
how English ought to be _written_.”

It was quite true--though I had at first found it difficult to
believe--that Delane must once have been a reader. He surprised me, one
night, as we were walking home from a dinner where we had met, by
apostrophizing the moon, as she rose, astonished, behind the steeple of
the “Heavenly Rest,” with “She walks in beauty like the night”; and he
was fond of describing a victorious charge in a polo match by saying:
“Tell you what, we came down on ’em like the Assyrian.” Nor had Byron
been his only fare. There had evidently been a time when he had known
the whole of “Gray’s Elegy” by heart, and I once heard him murmuring to
himself, as we stood together one autumn evening on the terrace of his
country-house:

    _Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,_
    _And all the air a solemn stillness holds...._

Little sympathy as I felt for Mrs. Delane, I could not believe it was
his marriage which had checked Delane’s interest in books. To judge from
his very limited stock of allusions and quotations, his reading seemed
to have ceased a good deal earlier than his first meeting with Leila
Gracy. Exploring him like a geologist, I found, for several layers under
the Leila stratum, no trace of any interest in letters; and I concluded
that, like other men I knew, his mind had been receptive up to a certain
age, and had then snapped shut on what it possessed, like a replete
crustacean never reached by another high tide. People, I had by this
time found, all stopped living at one time or another, however many
years longer they continued to be alive; and I suspected that Delane had
stopped at about nineteen. That date would roughly coincide with the end
of the civil war, and with his return to the common-place existence from
which he had never since deviated. Those four years had apparently
filled to the brim every crevice of his being. For I could not hold that
he had gone through them unawares, as some famous figures, puppets of
fate, have been tossed from heights to depths of human experience
without once knowing what was happening to them--forfeiting a crown by
the insistence on some prescribed ceremonial, or by carrying on their
flight a certain monumental dressing-case.

No, Hayley Delane had felt the war, had been made different by it; how
different I saw only when I compared him to the other “veterans” who,
from being regarded by me as the dullest of my father’s dinner-guests,
were now become figures of absorbing interest. Time was when, at my
mother’s announcement that General Scole or Major Detrancy was coming to
dine, I had invariably found a pretext for absenting myself; now, when I
knew they were expected, my chief object was to persuade her to invite
Delane.

“But he’s so much younger--he cares only for the sporting set. He won’t
be flattered at being asked with old gentlemen.” And my mother, with a
slight smile, would add: “If Hayley has a weakness, it’s the wish to be
thought younger than he is--on his wife’s account, I suppose.”

Once, however, she did invite him, and he accepted; and we got over
having to ask Mrs. Delane (who undoubtedly _would_ have been bored) by
leaving out Mrs. Scole and Mrs. Ruscott, and making it a “man’s dinner”
of the old-fashioned sort, with canvas-backs, a bowl of punch, and my
mother the only lady present--the kind of evening my father still liked
best.

I remember, at that dinner, how attentively I studied the contrasts, and
tried to detect the points of resemblance, between General Scole, old
Detrancy and Delane. Allusions to the war--anecdotes of Bull Run and
Andersonville, of Lincoln, Seward and MacClellan, were often on Major
Detrancy’s lips, especially after the punch had gone round. “When a
fellow’s been through the war,” he used to say as a preface to almost
everything, from expressing his opinion of last Sunday’s sermon to
praising the roasting of a canvas-back. Not so General Scole. No one
knew exactly why he had been raised to the rank he bore, but he tacitly
proclaimed his right to it by never alluding to the subject. He was a
tall and silent old gentleman with a handsome shock of white hair,
half-shut blue eyes glinting between veined lids, and an impressively
upright carriage. His manners were perfect--so perfect that they stood
him in lieu of language, and people would say afterward how agreeable
he had been when he had only bowed and smiled, and got up and sat down
again, with an absolute mastery of those difficult arts. He was said to
be a judge of horses and Madeira, but he never rode, and was reported to
give very indifferent wines to the rare guests he received in his grim
old house in Irving Place.

He and Major Detrancy had one trait in common--the extreme caution of
the old New Yorker. They viewed with instinctive distrust anything
likely to derange their habits, diminish their comfort, or lay on them
any unwonted responsibilities, civic or social; and slow as their other
mental processes were, they showed a supernatural quickness in divining
when a seemingly harmless conversation might draw them into “signing a
paper,” backing up even the mildest attempt at municipal reform, or
pledging them to support, on however small a scale, any new and
unfamiliar cause.

According to their creed, gentlemen subscribed as handsomely as their
means allowed to the Charity Organization Society, the Patriarchs Balls,
the Children’s Aid, and their own parochial charities. Everything beyond
savoured of “politics,” revivalist meetings, or the attempts of vulgar
persons to buy their way into the circle of the elect; even the Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, being of more recent creation,
seemed open to doubt, and they thought it rash of certain members of the
clergy to lend it their names. “But then,” as Major Detrancy said, “in
this noisy age some people will do anything to attract notice.” And they
breathed a joint sigh over the vanished “Old New York” of their youth,
the exclusive and impenetrable New York to which Rubini and Jenny Lind
had sung and Mr. Thackeray lectured, the New York which had declined to
receive Charles Dickens, and which, out of revenge, he had so
scandalously ridiculed.

Yet Major Detrancy and General Scole had fought all through the war, had
participated in horrors and agonies untold, endured all manner of
hardships and privations, suffered the extremes of heat and cold,
hunger, sickness and wounds; and it had all faded like an indigestion
comfortably slept off, leaving them perfectly commonplace and happy.

The same was true, with a difference, of Colonel Ruscott, who, though
not by birth of the same group, had long since been received into it,
partly because he was a companion in arms, partly because of having
married a Hayley connection. I can see Colonel Ruscott still: a dapper
handsome little fellow, rather too much of both, with a lustrous wave to
his hair (or was it a wig?), and a dash too much of Cologne on too-fine
cambric. He had been in the New York militia in his youth, had “gone
out” with the great Seventh; and the Seventh, ever since, had been the
source and centre of his being, as still, to some octogenarians, their
University dinner is.

Colonel Ruscott specialized in chivalry. For him the war was “the blue
and the grey,” the rescue of lovely Southern girls, anecdotes about Old
Glory, and the carrying of vital despatches through the enemy lines.
Enchantments seemed to have abounded in his path during the four years
which had been so drab and desolate to many; and the punch (to the
amusement of us youngsters, who were not above drawing him) always
evoked from his memory countless situations in which by prompt,
respectful yet insinuating action, he had stamped his image indelibly on
some proud Southern heart, while at the same time discovering where
Jackson’s guerillas lay, or at what point the river was fordable.

And there sat Hayley Delane, so much younger than the others, yet
seeming at such times so much their elder that I thought to myself: “But
if _he_ stopped growing up at nineteen, they’re still in long-clothes!”
But it was only morally that he had gone on growing. Intellectually they
were all on a par. When the last new play at Wallack’s was discussed, or
my mother tentatively alluded to the last new novel by the author of
_Robert Elsmere_ (it was her theory that, as long as the hostess was
present at a man’s dinner, she should keep the talk at the highest
level), Delane’s remarks were no more penetrating than his
neighbours’--and he was almost sure not to have read the novel.

It was when any social question was raised: any of the problems
concerning club administration, charity, or the relation between
“gentlemen” and the community, that he suddenly stood out from them, not
so much opposed as aloof.

He would sit listening, stroking my sister’s long skye-terrier (who,
defying all rules, had jumped up to his knees at dessert), with a grave
half-absent look on his heavy face; and just as my mother (I knew) was
thinking how bored he was, that big smile of his would reach out and
light up his dimple, and he would say, with enough diffidence to mark
his respect for his elders, yet a complete independence of their views:
“After all, what does it matter who makes the first move? The thing is
to get the business done.”

That was always the gist of it. To everyone else, my father included,
what mattered in everything, from Diocesan Meetings to Patriarchs Balls,
was just what Delane seemed so heedless of: the standing of the people
who made up the committee or headed the movement. To Delane, only the
movement itself counted; if the thing was worth doing, he pronounced in
his slow lazy way, get it done somehow, even if its backers _were_
Methodists or Congregationalists, or people who dined in the middle of
the day.

“If they were convicts from Sing Sing I shouldn’t care,” he affirmed,
his hand lazily flattering the dog’s neck as I had seen it caress
Byrne’s terrified poney.

“Or lunatics out of Bloomingdale--as these ‘reformers’ usually are,” my
father added, softening the remark with his indulgent smile.

“Oh, well,” Delane murmured, his attention flagging, “I daresay we’re
well enough off as we are.”

“Especially,” added Major Detrancy with a playful sniff, “with the punch
in the offing, as I perceive it to be.”

The punch struck the note for my mother’s withdrawal. She rose with her
shy circular smile, while the gentlemen, all on their feet, protested
gallantly at her desertion.

“Abandoning us to go back to Mr. Elsmere--we shall be jealous of the
gentleman!” Colonel Ruscott declared, chivalrously reaching the door
first; and as he opened it my father said, again with his indulgent
smile: “Ah, my wife--she’s a great reader.”

Then the punch was brought.




IV


“You’ll admit,” Mrs. Delane challenged me, “that Hayley’s perfect.”

Don’t imagine you have yet done with Mrs. Delane, any more than Delane
had, or I. Hitherto I have shown you only one side, or rather one phase,
of her; that during which, for obvious reasons, Hayley became an
obstacle or a burden. In the intervals between her great passions, when
somebody had to occupy the vacant throne in her bosom, her husband was
always reinstated there; and during these inter-lunar periods he and the
children were her staple subjects of conversation. If you had met her
then for the first time you would have taken her for the perfect wife
and mother, and wondered if Hayley ever got a day off; and you would not
have been far wrong in conjecturing that he seldom did.

Only these intervals were rather widely spaced, and usually of short
duration; and at other times, his wife being elsewhere engaged, it was
Delane who elder-brothered his big boys and their little sister.
Sometimes, on these occasions--when Mrs. Delane was abroad or at
Newport--Delane used to carry me off for a week to the quiet old house
in the New Jersey hills, full of Hayley and Delane portraits, of heavy
mahogany furniture and the mingled smell of lavender bags and
leather--leather boots, leather gloves, leather luggage, all the aromas
that emanate from the cupboards and passages of a house inhabited by
hard riders.

When his wife was at home he never seemed to notice the family portraits
or the old furniture. Leila carried off her own regrettable origin by
professing a democratic scorn of ancestors in general. “I know enough
bores in the flesh without bothering to remember all the dead ones,” she
said one day, when I had asked her the name of a stern-visaged old
forbear in breast-plate and buff jerkin who hung on the library wall:
and Delane, so practised in sentimental duplicities, winked jovially at
the children, as who should say: “There’s the proper American spirit for
you, my dears! That’s the way we all ought to feel.”

Perhaps, however, he detected a tinge of irritation in my own look, for
that evening, as we sat over the fire after Leila had yawned herself off
to bed, he glanced up at the armoured image, and said: “That’s old
Durward Hayley--the friend of Sir Harry Vane the Younger and all that
lot. I have some curious letters somewhere.... But Leila’s right, you
know,” he added loyally.

“In not being interested?”

“In regarding all that old past as dead. It _is_ dead. We’ve got no use
for it over here. That’s what that queer fellow in Washington always
used to say to me....”

“What queer fellow in Washington?”

“Oh, a sort of big backwoodsman who was awfully good to me when I was in
hospital ... after Bull Run....”

I sat up abruptly. It was the first time that Delane had mentioned his
life during the war. I thought my hand was on the clue; but it wasn’t.

“You were in hospital in Washington?”

“Yes; for a longish time. They didn’t know much about disinfecting
wounds in those days.... But Leila,” he resumed, with his smiling
obstinacy, “Leila’s dead right, you know. It’s a better world now. Think
of what has been done to relieve suffering since then!” When he
pronounced the word “suffering” the vertical furrows in his forehead
deepened as though he felt the actual pang of his old wound. “Oh, I
believe in progress every bit as much as _she_ does--I believe we’re
working out toward something better. If we weren’t....” He shrugged his
mighty shoulders, reached lazily for the adjoining tray, and mixed my
glass of whiskey-and-soda.

“But the war--you were wounded at Bull Run?”

“Yes.” He looked at his watch. “But I’m off to bed now. I promised the
children to take them for an early canter tomorrow, before lessons, and
I have to have my seven or eight hours of sleep to feel fit. I’m
getting on, you see. Put out the lights when you come up.”

No; he wouldn’t talk about the war.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was not long afterward that Mrs. Delane appealed to me to testify to
Hayley’s perfection. She had come back from her last absence--a six
weeks’ flutter at Newport--rather painfully subdued and pinched-looking.
For the first time I saw in the corners of her mouth that middle-aged
droop which has nothing to do with the loss of teeth. “How
common-looking she’ll be in a few years!” I thought uncharitably.

“Perfect--perfect,” she insisted; and then, plaintively: “And yet--”

I echoed coldly: “And yet?”

“With the children, for instance. He’s everything to them. He’s cut me
out with my own children.” She was half joking, half whimpering.

Presently she stole an eye-lashed look at me, and added: “And at times
he’s so _hard_.”

“Delane?”

“Oh, I know you won’t believe it. But in business matters--have you
never noticed? You wouldn’t admit it, I suppose. But there are times
when one simply can’t move him.” We were in the library, and she glanced
up at the breast-plated forbear. “He’s as hard to the touch as _that_.”
She pointed to the steel convexity.

“Not the Delane I know,” I murmured, embarrassed by these confidences.

“Ah, you think you know him?” she half-sneered; then, with a dutiful
accent: “I’ve always said he was a perfect father--and he’s made the
children think so. And yet--”

He came in, and dropping a pale smile on him she drifted away, calling
to her children.

I thought to myself: “She’s getting on, and something has told her so at
Newport. Poor thing!”

Delane looked as preoccupied as she did; but he said nothing till after
she had left us that evening. Then he suddenly turned to me.

“Look here. You’re a good friend of ours. Will you help me to think out
a rather bothersome question?”

“Me, sir?” I said, surprised by the “ours,” and overcome by so solemn an
appeal from my elder.

He made a wan grimace. “Oh, don’t call me ‘sir’; not during this talk.”
He paused, and then added: “You’re remembering the difference in our
ages. Well, that’s just why I’m asking you. I want the opinion of
somebody who hasn’t had time to freeze into his rut--as most of my
contemporaries have. The fact is, I’m trying to make my wife see that
we’ve got to let her father come and live with us.”

My open-mouthed amazement must have been marked enough to pierce his
gloom, for he gave a slight laugh. “Well, yes--”

I sat dumbfounded. All New York knew what Delane thought of his suave
father-in-law. He had married Leila in spite of her antecedents; but
Bill Gracy, at the outset, had been given to understand that he would
not be received under the Delane roof. Mollified by the regular payment
of a handsome allowance, the old gentleman, with tears in his eyes, was
wont to tell his familiars that personally he didn’t blame his
son-in-law. “Our tastes differ: that’s all. Hayley’s not a bad chap at
heart; give you my word he isn’t.” And the familiars, touched by such
magnanimity, would pledge Hayley in the champagne provided by his last
remittance.

Delane, as I still remained silent, began to explain. “You see,
somebody’s got to look after him--who else is there?”

“But--” I stammered.

“You’ll say he’s always needed looking after? Well, I’ve done my best;
short of having him here. For a long time that seemed impossible; I
quite agreed with Leila--” (So it was Leila who had banished her
father!) “But now,” Delane continued, “it’s different. The poor old
chap’s getting on: he’s been breaking up very fast this last year. And
some bloodsucker of a woman has got hold of him, and threatened to rake
up old race-course rows, and I don’t know what. If we don’t take him in
he’s bound to go under. It’s his last chance--he feels it is. He’s
scared; he wants to come.”

I was still silent, and Delane went on: “You think, I suppose, what’s
the use? Why not let him stew in his own juice? With a decent allowance,
of course. Well, I can’t say ... I can’t tell you ... only I feel it
mustn’t be....”

“And Mrs. Delane?”

“Oh, I see her point. The children are growing up; they’ve hardly known
their grandfather. And having him in the house isn’t going to be like
having a nice old lady in a cap knitting by the fire. He takes up room,
Gracy does; it’s not going to be pleasant. She thinks we ought to
consider the children first. But I don’t agree. The world’s too ugly a
place; why should anyone grow up thinking it’s a flower-garden?
Let ’em take their chance.... And then”--he hesitated, as if
embarrassed--“well, you know her; she’s fond of society. Why shouldn’t
she be? She’s made for it. And of course it’ll cut us off, prevent our
inviting people. She won’t like that, though she doesn’t admit that it
has anything to do with her objecting.”

So, after all, he judged the wife he still worshipped! I was beginning
to see why he had that great structural head, those large quiet
movements. There _was_ something--

“What alternative does Mrs. Delane propose?”

He coloured. “Oh, more money. I sometimes fancy,” he brought out, hardly
above a whisper, “that she thinks I’ve suggested having him here because
I don’t want to give more money. She won’t understand, you see, that
more money would just precipitate things.”

I coloured too, ashamed of my own thought. Had she not, perhaps,
understood; was it not her perspicacity which made her hold out? If her
father was doomed to go under, why prolong the process? I could not be
sure, now, that Delane did not suspect this also, and allow for it.
There was apparently no limit to what he allowed for.

“_You’ll_ never be frozen into a rut,” I ventured, smiling.

“Perhaps not frozen; but sunk down deep. I’m that already. Give me a
hand up, do!” He answered my smile.

I was still in the season of cocksureness, and at a distance could no
doubt have dealt glibly with the problem. But at such short range, and
under those melancholy eyes, I had a chastening sense of inexperience.

“You don’t care to tell me what you think?” He spoke almost
reproachfully.

“Oh, it’s not that.... I’m trying to. But it’s so--so awfully
evangelical,” I brought out--for some of us were already beginning to
read the Russians.

“Is it? Funny, that, too. For I have an idea I got it, with other
things, from an old heathen; that chap I told you about, who used to
come and talk to me by the hour in Washington.”

My interest revived. “That chap in Washington--was he a heathen?”

“Well, he didn’t go to church.” Delane did, regularly taking the
children, while Leila slept off the previous night’s poker, and joining
in the hymns in a robust barytone, always half a tone flat.

He seemed to guess that I found his reply inadequate, and added
helplessly: “You know I’m no scholar: I don’t know what you’d call him.”
He lowered his voice to add: “I don’t think he believed in our Lord.
Yet he taught me Christian charity.”

“He must have been an unusual sort of man, to have made such an
impression on you. What was his name?”

“There’s the pity! I must have heard it, but I was all foggy with fever
most of the time, and can’t remember. Nor what became of him either. One
day he didn’t turn up--that’s all I recall. And soon afterward I was off
again, and didn’t think of him for years. Then, one day, I had to settle
something with myself, and, by George, there he was, telling me the
right and wrong of it! Queer--he comes like that, at long intervals;
turning-points, I suppose.” He frowned, his heavy head sunk forward, his
eyes distant, pursuing the vision.

“Well--hasn’t he come this time?”

“Rather! That’s my trouble--I can’t see things in any way but his. And I
want another eye to help me.”

My heart was beating rather excitedly. I felt small, trivial and
inadequate, like an intruder on some grave exchange of confidences.

I tried to postpone my reply, and at the same time to satisfy another
curiosity. “Have you ever told Mrs. Delane about--about him?”

Delane roused himself and turned to look at me. He lifted his shaggy
eyebrows slightly, protruded his lower lip, and sank once more into
abstraction.

“Well, sir,” I said, answering the look, “_I_ believe in him.”

The blood rose in his dark cheek. He turned to me again, and for a
second the dimple twinkled through his gloom. “That’s your answer?”

I nodded breathlessly.

He got up, walked the length of the room, and came back, pausing in
front of me. “He just vanished. I never even knew his name....”




V


Delane was right; having Bill Gracy under one’s roof was not like
harbouring a nice old lady. I looked on at the sequence of our talk and
marvelled.

New York--the Delanes’ New York--sided unhesitatingly with Leila.
Society’s attitude toward drink and dishonesty was still inflexible: a
man who had had to resign from his clubs went down into a pit presumably
bottomless. The two or three people who thought Delane’s action “rather
fine” made haste to add: “But he ought to have taken a house for the old
man in some quiet place in the country.” Bill Gracy cabined in a quiet
place in the country! Within a week he would have set the neighbourhood
on fire. He was simply not to be managed by proxy; Delane had understood
that, and faced it.

Nothing in the whole unprecedented situation was more odd, more
unexpected and interesting, than Mr. Gracy’s own perception of it. He
too had become aware that his case was without alternative.

“They _had_ to have me here, by gad; I see that myself. Old firebrand
like me ... couldn’t be trusted! Hayley saw it from the first--fine
fellow, my son-in-law. He made no bones about telling me so. Said: I
can’t trust you, father’ ... said it right out to me. By gad, if he’d
talked to me like that a few years sooner I don’t answer for the
consequences! But I ain’t my own man any longer.... I’ve got to put up
with being treated like a baby.... I forgave him on the spot, sir--on
the spot.” His fine eye filled, and he stretched a soft old hand, netted
with veins and freckles, across the table to me.

In the virtual seclusion imposed by his presence I was one of the few
friends the Delanes still saw. I knew Leila was grateful to me for
coming; but I did not need that incentive. It was enough that I could
give even a negative support to Delane. The first months were horrible;
but he was evidently saying to himself: “Things will settle down
gradually,” and just squaring his great shoulders to the storm.

Things didn’t settle down; as embodied in Bill Gracy they continued in a
state of effervescence. Filial care, good food and early hours restored
the culprit to comparative health; he became exuberant, arrogant and
sly. Happily his first imprudence caused a relapse alarming even to
himself. He saw that his powers of resistance were gone, and,
tremulously tender over his own plight, he relapsed into a plaintive
burden. But he was never a passive one. Some part or other he had to
play, usually to somebody’s detriment.

One day a strikingly dressed lady forced her way in to see him, and the
house echoed with her recriminations. Leila objected to the children’s
assisting at such scenes, and when Christmas brought the boys home she
sent them to Canada with a tutor, and herself went with the little girl
to Florida. Delane, Gracy and I sat down alone to our Christmas turkey,
and I wondered what Delane’s queer friend of the Washington hospital
would have thought of that festivity. Mr. Gracy was in a melting mood,
and reviewed his past with an edifying prolixity. “After all, women and
children have always loved me,” he summed up, a tear on his lashes. “But
I’ve been a curse to you and Leila, and I know it, Hayley. That’s my
only merit, I suppose--that I _do_ know it! Well, here’s to turning over
a new leaf ...” and so forth.

One day, a few months later, Mr. Broad, the head of the firm, sent for
me. I was surprised, and somewhat agitated, at the summons, for I was
not often called into his august presence.

“Mr. Delane has a high regard for your ability,” he began affably.

I bowed, thrilled at what I supposed to be a hint of promotion; but Mr.
Broad went on: “I know you are at his house a great deal. In spite of
the difference in age he always speaks of you as an old friend.” Hopes
of promotion faded, yet left me unregretful. Somehow, this was even
better. I bowed again.

Mr. Broad was becoming embarrassed. “You see Mr. William Gracy rather
frequently at his son-in-law’s?”

“He’s living there,” I answered bluntly.

Mr. Broad heaved a sigh. “Yes. It’s a fine thing of Mr. Delane ... but
does he quite realize the consequences? His own family side with his
wife. You’ll wonder at my speaking with such frankness ... but I’ve been
asked ... it has been suggested....”

“If he weren’t there he’d be in the gutter.”

Mr. Broad sighed more deeply. “Ah, it’s a problem.... You may ask why I
don’t speak directly to Mr. Delane ... but it’s so delicate, and he’s so
uncommunicative. Still, there are Institutions.... You don’t feel
there’s anything to be done?”

I was silent, and he shook hands, murmured: “This is confidential,” and
made a motion of dismissal. I withdrew to my desk, feeling that the
situation must indeed be grave if Mr. Broad could so emphasize it by
consulting me.

       *       *       *       *       *

New York, to ease its mind of the matter, had finally decided that
Hayley Delane was “queer.” There were the two of them, madmen both,
hobnobbing together under his roof; no wonder poor Leila found the place
untenable! That view, bruited about, as such things are, with a
mysterious underground rapidity, prepared me for what was to follow.

One day during the Easter holidays I went to dine with the Delanes, and
finding my host alone with old Gracy I concluded that Leila had again
gone off with the children. She had: she had been gone a week, and had
just sent a letter to her husband saying that she was sailing from
Montreal with the little girl. The boys would be sent back to Groton
with a trusted servant. She would add nothing more, as she did not wish
to reflect unkindly on what his own family agreed with her in thinking
an act of ill-advised generosity. He knew that she was worn out by the
strain he had imposed on her, and would understand her wishing to get
away for a while....

She had left him.

Such events were not, in those days, the matters of course they have
since become; and I doubt if, on a man like Delane, the blow would ever
have fallen lightly. Certainly that evening was the grimmest I ever
passed in his company. I had the same impression as on the day of
Bolton Byrne’s chastisement: the sense that Delane did not care a fig
for public opinion. His knowing that it sided with his wife did not, I
believe, affect him in the least; nor did her own view of his
conduct--and for that I was unprepared. What really ailed him, I
discovered, was his loneliness. He missed her, he wanted her back--her
trivial irritating presence was the thing in the world he could least
dispense with. But when he told me what she had done he simply added: “I
see no help for it; we’ve both of us got a right to our own opinion.”

Again I looked at him with astonishment. Another voice seemed to be
speaking through his lips, and I had it on mine to say: “Was that what
your old friend in Washington would have told you?” But at the door of
the dining-room, where we had lingered, Mr. Gracy’s flushed countenance
and unreverend auburn locks appeared between us.

“Look here, Hayley; what about our little game? If I’m to be packed off
to bed at ten like a naughty boy you might at least give me my hand of
poker first.” He winked faintly at me as we passed into the library, and
added, in a hoarse aside: “If he thinks he’s going to boss me like Leila
he’s mistaken. Flesh and blood’s one thing; now she’s gone I’ll be
damned if I take any bullying.”

That threat was the last flare of Mr. Gracy’s indomitable spirit. The
act of defiance which confirmed it brought on a severe attack of
pleurisy. Delane nursed the old man with dogged patience, and he emerged
from the illness diminished, wizened, the last trace of auburn gone from
his scant curls, and nothing left of his old self but a harmless dribble
of talk.

Delane taught him to play patience, and he used to sit for hours by the
library fire, puzzling over the cards, or talking to the children’s
parrot, which he fed and tended with a touching regularity. He also
devoted a good deal of time to collecting stamps for his youngest
grandson, and his increasing gentleness and playful humour so endeared
him to the servants that a trusted housemaid had to be dismissed for
smuggling cocktails into his room. On fine days Delane, coming home
earlier from the bank, would take him for a short stroll; and one day,
happening to walk up Fifth Avenue behind them, I noticed that the
younger man’s broad shoulders were beginning to stoop like the other’s,
and that there was less lightness in his gait than in Bill Gracy’s
jaunty shamble. They looked like two old men doing their daily mile on
the sunny side of the street. Bill Gracy was no longer a danger to the
community, and Leila might have come home. But I understood from Delane
that she was still abroad with her daughter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Society soon grows used to any state of things which is imposed upon it
without explanation. I had noticed that Delane never explained; his
chief strength lay in that negative quality. He was probably hardly
aware that people were beginning to say: “Poor old Gracy--after all,
he’s making a decent end. It was the proper thing for Hayley to do--but
his wife ought to come back and share the burden with him.” In important
matters he was so careless of public opinion that he was not likely to
notice its veering. He wanted Leila to come home; he missed her and the
little girl more and more; but for him there was no “ought” about the
matter.

And one day she came. Absence had rejuvenated her, she had some dazzling
new clothes, she had made the acquaintance of a charming Italian
nobleman who was coming to New York on the next steamer ... she was
ready to forgive her husband, to be tolerant, resigned and even fond.
Delane, with his amazing simplicity, took all this for granted; the
effect of her return was to make him feel he had somehow been in the
wrong, and he was ready to bask in her forgiveness. Luckily for her own
popularity she arrived in time to soothe her parent’s declining moments.
Mr. Gracy was now a mere mild old pensioner and Leila used to drive out
with him regularly, and refuse dull invitations “because she had to be
with Papa.” After all, people said, she had a heart. Her husband
thought so too, and triumphed in the conviction. At that time life under
the Delane roof, though melancholy, was idyllic; it was a pity old Gracy
could not have been kept alive longer, so miraculously did his presence
unite the household it had once divided. But he was beyond being aware
of this, and from a cheerful senility sank into coma and death. The
funeral was attended by the whole of New York, and Leila’s crape veil
was of exactly the right length--a matter of great importance in those
days.

       *       *       *       *       *

Life has a way of overgrowing its achievements as well as its ruins. In
less time than seemed possible in so slow-moving a society, the Delane’s
family crisis had been smothered and forgotten. Nothing seemed changed
in the mutual attitude of husband and wife, or in that of their little
group toward the couple. If anything, Leila had gained in popular esteem
by her assiduity at her father’s bedside; though as a truthful
chronicler I am bound to add that she partly forfeited this advantage by
plunging into a flirtation with the Italian nobleman before her crape
trimmings had been replaced by _passementerie_. On such fundamental
observances old New York still took its stand.

As for Hayley Delane, he emerged older, heavier, more stooping, but
otherwise unchanged, from the ordeal. I am not sure that anyone except
myself was aware that there had been an ordeal. But my conviction
remained. His wife’s return had changed him back into a card-playing,
ball-going, race-frequenting elderly gentleman; but I had seen the
waters part, and a granite rock thrust up from them. Twice the upheaval
had taken place; and each time in obedience to motives unintelligible
to the people he lived among. Almost any man can take a stand on a
principle his fellow-citizens are already occupying; but Hayley Delane
held out for things his friends could not comprehend, and did it for
reasons he could not explain. The central puzzle subsisted.

Does it subsist for me to this day? Sometimes, walking up town from the
bank where in my turn I have become an institution, I glance through the
rails of Trinity churchyard and wonder. He has lain there ten years or
more now; his wife has married the President of a rising Western
University, and grown intellectual and censorious; his children are
scattered and established. Does the old Delane vault hold his secret, or
did I surprise it one day; did he and I surprise it together?

It was one Sunday afternoon, I remember, not long after Bill Gracy’s
edifying end. I had not gone out of town that week-end, and after a long
walk in the frosty blue twilight of Central Park I let myself into my
little flat. To my surprise I saw Hayley Delane’s big overcoat and tall
hat in the hall. He used to drop in on me now and then, but mostly on
the way home from a dinner where we happened to have met; and I was
rather startled at his appearance at that hour and on a Sunday. But he
lifted an untroubled face from the morning paper.

“You didn’t expect a call on a Sunday? Fact is, I’m out of a job. I
wanted to go down to the country, as usual, but there’s some grand
concert or other that Leila was booked for this afternoon; and a dinner
tonight at Alstrop’s. So I dropped in to pass the time of day. What
_is_ there to do on a Sunday afternoon, anyhow?”

There he was, the same old usual Hayley, as much put to it as the merest
fribble of his set to employ an hour unfilled by poker! I was glad he
viewed me as a possible alternative, and laughingly told him so. He
laughed too--we were on terms of brotherly equality--and told me to go
ahead and read two or three notes which had arrived in my absence.
“Gad--how they shower down on a fellow at your age!” he chuckled.

I broke the seals and was glancing through the letters when I heard an
exclamation at my back.

“By Jove--there he is!” Hayley Delane shouted. I turned to see what he
meant.

He had taken up a book--an unusual gesture, but it lay at his elbow, and
I suppose he had squeezed the newspapers dry. He held the volume out to
me without speaking, his forefinger resting on the open page; his
swarthy face was in a glow, his hand shook a little. The page to which
his finger pointed bore the steel engraving of a man’s portrait.

“It’s him to the life--I’d know those old clothes of his again
anywhere,” Delane exulted, jumping up from his seat.

I took the book and stared first at the portrait and then at my friend.

“Your pal in Washington?”

He nodded excitedly. “That chap I’ve often told you about--yes!” I shall
never forget the way his smile flew out and reached the dimple. There
seemed a network of them spangling his happy face. His eyes had grown
absent, as if gazing down invisible vistas. At length they travelled
back to me.

“How on earth did the old boy get his portrait in a book? Has somebody
been writing something about him?” His sluggish curiosity awakened, he
stretched his hand for the volume. But I held it back.

“Lots of people have written about him; but this book is his own.”

“You mean he wrote it?” He smiled incredulously. “Why, the poor chap
hadn’t any education!”

“Perhaps he had more than you think. Let me keep the book a moment
longer, and read you something from it.”

He signed an assent, though I could see the apprehension of the printed
page already clouding his interest.

“What sort of things did he write?”

“Things for _you_. Now listen.”

He settled back into his armchair, composing a painfully attentive
countenance, and I sat down and began:

    _A sight in camp in the day-break grey and dim._
    _As from my tent I emerge so early, sleepless,_
    _As slow I walk in the cool fresh air, the path near by
          the hospital tent,_
    _Three forms I see on stretchers lying, brought out there,
          untended lying,_
    _Over each the blanket spread, ample brownish woollen blanket,_
    _Grey and heavy blanket, folding, covering all._

    _Curious, I halt, and silent stand:_
    _Then with light fingers I from the face of the nearest,
          the first, just lift the blanket:_
    _Who are you, elderly man so gaunt and grim, with well-grey’d
          hair, and flesh all sunken about the eyes?_
    _Who are you, my dear comrade?_

    _Then to the second I step--And who are you, my child and darling?_
    _Who are you, sweet boy, with cheeks yet blooming?_

    _Then to the third--a face nor child, nor old, very calm,
          as of beautiful yellow-white ivory;_
    _Young man, I think I know you--I think this face of yours
          is the face of the Christ himself;_
    _Dead and divine, and brother of all, and here again he lies._

I laid the open book on my knee, and stole a glance at Delane. His face
was a blank, still composed in the heavy folds of enforced attention. No
spark had been struck from him. Evidently the distance was too great
between the far-off point at which he and English poetry had parted
company, and this new strange form it had put on. I must find something
which would bring the matter closely enough home to surmount the
unfamiliar medium.

    _Vigil strange I kept on the field one night,_
    _When you, my son and my comrade, dropt at my side...._

The starlit murmur of the verse flowed on, muffled, insistent; my throat
filled with it, my eyes grew dim. I said to myself, as my voice sank on
the last line: “He’s reliving it all now, seeing it again--knowing for
the first time that someone else saw it as he did.”

Delane stirred uneasily in his seat, and shifted his crossed legs one
over the other. One hand absently stroked the fold of his carefully
ironed trousers. His face was still a blank. The distance had not yet
been bridged between “Gray’s Elegy” and this unintelligible harmony. But
I was not discouraged. I ought not to have expected any of it to reach
him--not just at first--except by way of the closest personal appeal. I
turned from the “Lovely and Soothing Death,” at which I had re-opened
the book, and looked for another page. My listener leaned back
resignedly.

    _Bearing the bandages, water and sponge,_
    _Straight and swift to my wounded I go...._

I read on to the end. Then I shut the book and looked up again. Delane
sat silent, his great hands clasping the arms of his chair, his head
slightly sunk on his breast. His lids were dropped, as I imagined
reverentially. My own heart was beating with a religious emotion; I had
never felt the oft-read lines as I felt them then.

A little timidly, he spoke at length. “Did _he_ write that?”

“Yes; just about the time you were seeing him, probably.”

Delane still brooded; his expression grew more and more timid. “What do
you ... er ... call it ... exactly?” he ventured.

I was puzzled for a moment; then: “Why, poetry ... rather a free form,
of course.... You see, he was an originator of new verse-forms....”

“New verse-forms?” Delane echoed forlornly. He stood up in his heavy
way, but did not offer to take the book from me again. I saw in his face
the symptoms of approaching departure.

“Well, I’m glad to have seen his picture after all these years,” he
said; and on the threshold he paused to ask: “What was his name, by the
way?”

When I told him he repeated it with a smile of slow relish. “Yes; that’s
it. Old Walt--that was what all the fellows used to call him. He was a
great chap: I’ll never forget him.--I rather wish, though,” he added, in
his mildest tone of reproach, “you hadn’t told me that he wrote all that
rubbish.”


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Spark, by Edith Wharton and E. C. Caswell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPARK ***

***** This file should be named 61298-0.txt or 61298-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/2/9/61298/

Produced by Chuck Greif, MWS and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
